did you play tetris growing up i do
actually yeah okay that's awesome
do you think that's what inspired you to
no
i'm not sure about that can you tell us
what does
tetris have to do with your work well
okay so that part of my work
concerns interface growth and
so the sort of thing that you can have
in mind
is like for example if there's a forest
fire
so the fire is burning behind it it
leaves a region that was burned in front
of it as a region which is unburned
and so you have an interface which is
the flame front that separates the two
regions
and it moves clearly from somehow the
burnt region into the unburnt region
and now one thing we're interested in
is in that type of situations to
describe the fluctuations of that front
right so the front moves at some kind of
average speed
but then the speed is not completely
uniform so there are bits that move a
little bit faster this will move a
little bit slower
so after a while it's going to even if
it starts out flat
uh after a bit it's going to look a bit
rugged like that right
and so what we're interested in is not
so much the average position
but more like you know the random
fluctuations on top
and so this is really not specifically
about forest fires right so it's really
about
any situation which is
which is similar in flavor in the sense
that you have two regions
you're in two dimensions so you're on a
plane you have two regions
one region wants to invade the other
region
and there's a separation between the two
the separation moves
but it moves a bit randomly and you're
interested in understanding the
fluctuations
so this is tetris bricks versus so this
is the space
versus empty space exactly so
the bricks of the fire the bricks of the
fire the empty space
of grass or trees or whatever gotcha and
so what other examples you mentioned
fires we've got tetris
obviously the best one but there's one
example that people actually made very
precise experiments
um which is a liquid crystal
so that one you take a liquid crystal so
the same kind of liquid crystals you
have in your
mobile phone or laptop screen and
that one it also it comes in two phases
and they have different optical
properties so you can literally see the
difference between the two
and so all you have to do is take
pictures of it basically to see
which part is in which phase and one of
them is again more stable
than the other one and so what you do is
you prepare it in the unstable one
and then you take the laser beam and you
zap it at it
and where the where the laser beam hits
the liquid crystal
it gives enough activation energy to
flip
from the unstable into the stable state
right
and so you basically draw a line of
the stable region which you can it's
literally drawing you actually see
the difference in column and then that
one automatically
broadens up because it's more stable so
it wants to invade
the unstable region and again so you
have you see a line that gets thicker
and thicker
and it starts off really like a straight
line it gets thicker
but then the boundaries of that line
start wobbling a little bit
right and so you're interested in the
fluctuations of that boundary
so it really doesn't matter at all in
terms of the
sort of overriding mathematics physics
behind right
it really doesn't matter it would be
essentially the same mathematics
um so there's this idea of universality
which is that
for some things so for example the
average speed
would be you know determined by what's
the precise situation so you couldn't
predict it april right so there's no way
you just have to measure it
but the shape of these fluctuations the
idea is that's
something that's supposed to be
universal in the sense that it really
should be the same
um the same shape whatever situation as
long as it's the same
type of situation right well i would
think
everything you've described is
inherently random
and yet you've sort of said that there's
this universal
behavior is that the same way in the
same way as the
you know the gaussian distribution the
bell curve
is also universal in a similar way right
in the sense that you can
if you add sufficiently many small
random quantities
whichever way these quantities behave
individually
when you add sufficiently many of them
you always get a bell curve
and it's always the same right the
distribution of what you get
is always going to be a gaussian in the
end and so yeah
so it's the same type of universality
except that here instead of talking
about
the fluctuation of just one random
number you're talking about fluctuations
of a random curve or random moving
because
it's a curve that actually moves in time
trying to find
the gaussian equivalent right these are
sort of the analog exactly so it's the
analog of the gaussian
the four motion of interfaces
i see okay so let's have a look at one
of these interfaces
okay so so since the idea is that the
fluctuation should always be the same
well it means if you take basically any
sort of mathematical model
it doesn't have to have anything to do
with reality as long as
it has the same features so it's in two
dimensions there's two regions
one region invades the other one and
there's some randomness involved
and the randomness that's involved is
sort of more or less independent in
different chunks of space
right and so what you do here is you
basically take a tetris game the
treacherous brakes are falling down from
the sky but it's an infinitely wide
treacherous game
and we're not controlling these we are
not controlling this so they just fall
down
randomly and we don't play
and they can't play the shape of the
brick is also random
exactly so it's a standard tetra species
i've seen in the square
exactly standard tetris bricks
random orientation okay random shape
random location
and they just fall down and they pile up
according to so if you were really
bad at tetris it would look like this
exactly okay
that's right except that that one is
really wide so you can kind of zoom out
a bit and you see that they've been
falling down
everywhere right so you've got loads and
loads of tattoo springs
piling up um and now here you really see
you start to see that there's actually
you know sort of a continuous curve here
yeah it looks like almost like branches
or like a tree
yeah growing outwards yeah that's right
so you have these uh
these kind of canals forming right so
you have to so when you
oh wow if you zoom out yeah sometimes
you see these big
and that's just completely random that's
there's no reason to expect that or is
um no so it's completely random but um
i mean you can you can more or less
figure out why these canals
form right because it's it's when you
have a big overhang
so if you have a big overhand then it's
going to persist for a while but it's
essentially going to move right because
there's an overhang then bricks fall
down but then they sort of pile up
diagonally
right and so it makes the overhand sort
of move up diagonally
and that's essentially these channels
that you see right it's kind of these
overhangs
is that particularly too tetris like
because of the shape of the brick
well it's because the right so so if the
bricks were just single breaks
and they just pile up then that wouldn't
be interesting in a way
right because because then there
wouldn't be any interaction
between between the neighbors what
happens at every point would just be
completely independent from what happens
at any other point
and then you wouldn't expect anything
interesting so here you can actually
change the shape of the brick so for
example if you do
this so now it's tetris with only square
bricks
all right so so here
right so it's only square bricks but
there are two by two bricks
every right so they can actually
everyone is a square
but they're all two by two so they can
still so they can still pile up
diagonally
right so they can still form these
channels for example right because if
they were one by one
then they couldn't pile up diagonally
yes
so then it would be very good so this
one's very similar so this one's very
similar
right so you see you zoom out so here
you still see the difference it looks a
little bit different because they're all
the same bricks
but you know by the time you're here you
don't really see the difference
no that to me that looks the same yeah
yeah it looks the same whereas if you
did the
just single break so you can do that as
well and then it looks very
uninteresting so if we do the single one
and i i reset the whole thing this is a
single square so now it's just single
squares
um and you see so it just goes up like
that but you don't
you don't have anything interested in
forming of course there's no hole
there's no gaps anymore because you just
pile up like that
is there a reason for the spikes is this
yes because um
at every point you have something like
uh
you just add up independent numbers
and so you have a law of large numbers
which is the you know
which is sort of the average height and
then you have a central limit theorem
which tells you kind of the height of
these spikes
is basically about the standard
deviation of the gaussian that you see
in the center of the nectar yeah
fantastic because they do look about the
same up and down yeah you've said that
yeah
but you see that they get larger and
larger because of the square root of n
in the central limit theorem right so it
moves up at speed
linear speed and the spikes getting
square
i already liked the central limit
theorem but after seeing this i now like
it even more like this is
i'm going to use this to teach this this
is amazing so
so one thing you can do so this one is
also single breaks
but this time the single bricks can also
stick to the neighbors
right and then it's really much more
like tetris again right because then
they can again
grow they can grow that i can delay
we're seeing the gaps and you can see
the gaps you see the same sort of thing
right so
so this time so if we just look at what
happens
you see they fall down but they actually
stick they stick to it right it's like
they're magnetic
exactly yeah
nice okay see and then you zoom out
again it looks basically the same as
tetris
right so one so as fun as it is to use
the tetris bricks there's nothing but
there's nothing
particularly there's nothing special at
all um i see
there's obviously no scientific
literature from the temperance model
there's a lot of physical literature on
this one which is called ballistic
deposition so that's
that's the one where you just have
single bricks but they stick to
neighbors
right because that's somehow one of the
simplest ones you can say
it's easier to formulate yeah okay than
the tetris one
but of course if tesla's just used these
bricks it would be a less fun game
right right